# The Workflow Journey
## Where it Begins
As with most people, I began on Windows and Mac. I dabbled in Linux a few times off and on, but I was a Windows and MacOS user at heart at this point. Unfortunately, this is also why I started looking elsewhere. In my curiosity and quest to control and learn the deeper workings of machines like my own, I could not resist the allure of a controlled operating system or the customizability associated with linux distros. This led me to start this journey.

## The First Step: Ubuntu
Pretty much everybody starts here. Anyone who has used Linux knows this step. I went with something supported and known. I knew no concept of a "distro" or "linux distro" or something, I just knew Ubuntu, so I installed Ubuntu. I liked it, for the most part. It felt like a cohesive system, but definitely something I felt restricted in. The system defaults, snap packages, GNOME desktop, among other things all culminated in a similar, "developer knows best" type of system that windows shared. It reminded me of many issues I had with windows but with more trouble running what I wanted to do, such as games and modding materials at the time. Being fresh out of high school, I was not all that great with this kind of work for myself. I was stubborn, though, so I pressed onto solutions that may solve my problems. This was where I discovered the concept of a "distro", giving me the bridge to my next step.

## Next Attempt: Garuda Linux
This was quite the jump. It was more than just a different distro, as it was also a change in foundation. I went from using `apt` to `pacman` as a package manager, for example. This was architecturally different from Ubuntu, which was Debian Based. Garuda Linux is Arch Based. I had no idea what I was getting into. As a result, my time was vastly different here. I got that control I wanted and feeling of freedom I so desperately wanted. I learned what an Arch-Based system felt like and why this would become my home for the next few years. I used Garuda Linux for a long while, as it provided an easy setup, community, and optimizations I felt like I could benefit from. In addition, I had that control. Over time, though, I realized how large Garuda was. I did not use many of the programs in it, and the system did not feel like it was "mine". I was beginning to fall deeper into the rabbit hole.

## A Step Closer: Artix Linux
I now knew what my system was based on. I wanted the barebones and control. I wanted a system that was mine. As a result, I went straight for Arch. The reason this section is called Artix is because I was unsuccessful. Even though there is extensive documentation in installing Arch Linux, I failed with an error I did not understand. Over hours of troubleshooting, I finally caved and took on a graphical installer for an Arch system to get as close to barebones as I could. This is where I found Artix. 
I was still relatively new to Linux, so I did not understand Artix's philosophy at the time. I just wanted my own system. Here, I got what I wanted. Mostly. At the end of the day, I was still missing critical features Windows had. Things such as HDR, RGB Control, and Game support were something I really wanted. Add on modding tools, and my mind was sadly made. I went back to Windows after a short time on Artix. I knew that I had failed Linux, but I also knew the features I wanted were arriving in only a matter of time. I would be back.

Though, after some time, the Linux ecosystem would begin to catch up.

## The Main Attraction: Arch Linux
After HDR and OpenRGB had reasonable updates, I immediately took my chance. I grabbed an Arch Linux install ISO and got to work. I used the `archinstall` script to get myself off the ground on the most barebones system I believed I could reasonable run with my experience. At last, it installed successfully. I was now running Arch Linux using GNOME. The reason I stuck to GNOME was the UI style and unified experience, choosing to make it my own with extensions. It worked beautifully. To motivate myself, I wiped windows from my drives entirely and stuck with my backup files in a separate, physical drive. This was my new home.

I spent the most time on Arch Linux by far -- This was not just a stop like the others. I made a real system out of Arch Linux. I played games, modded, ran virtual machines, communicated online, watched movies, tv shows, and did work all on this system. I knew I was at the origin of Arch-Based communities, so I felt like I had reached the final step. I configured my system to be usable and daily driveable on Arch for around 6 months. Arch was great, I had no issues with it -- initially. This will be elaborated on later. From here, the workflow evolution continues in desktop experiences.

### GNOME - It's Pretty
I loved the unified look of GNOME. It reminded me of MacOS and the GTK look of everything was seamless. All of my things looked the same and it all blended together nicely. I stuck on here for a while, as it supported HDR well and didn't bother me. It was only a matter of time until I craved that customization again, though. Slowly, I started feeling that same restrictive feel that Windows bestowed on me. GNOME was very limiting in what I could do -- almost forcefully making me like the "GNOME" way. This led me to try other things.

### KDE - It's Mine
KDE Plasma 6 was a monumental upgrade from GNOME. It gave me the stability I wanted while allowing me to move anything and everything exactly the way I wanted. I had blur effects. I had a dock. I had a menu bar. I had animated wallpapers. I had it all. Aside from the pretty things, I discovered new tools in making these changes. I learned ZShell. I learned to customize my prompt, showing git statuses and directory structures. I learned how to theme and where configurations lie. I learned the linux file structure, allowing me to further configure my system. In my final days of KDE, I had the ultimate "me" system. It was beautiful, sensible, and configured in the way I like. There was just one small issue:

Organization.

Everything was everywhere. Configurations in 3 different parent folders. Programs all over my /bin folder. Services galore. I got what I wanted, but the maintenance was an organizational nightmare. This sent me on a very specific journey that would lead me to something very intentional.

Here, I discovered some new tools on KDE.

#### dcli and Decman
`dcli` and `decman` are two wings of the same bird. They each are *declarative* management tools for Arch Linux. I learned about this great concept of declaring my system through nix documentation. Nix was extremely confusing to me and seemed like a whole other project, involving an OS that would force me to abandon the Arch User Repository, a community that I was afraid of losing the convenience of. In this, I learned about `dcli` and `decman` as tools to get this declarative approach on Arch Linux. I declared my system packages, configuration files and directories as well as where they would be linked to, services, and AUR packages. It cleaned my system of anything not declared and kept what I wanted, bringing my package count from 2000 to 1300. I was astounded. This was the ultimate organizational tool and management philosophy. Little did I know, this was going to become so much more later.

### Hyprland - The Ultimate Customization Workflow
Using these new tools and declarative configurations, I knew I had the organization and skills to expand my work even further. This led me to explore what others were building, to see what was actually possible. I ended up discovering the ultimate simplicity and workflow management in desktop experiences: window managers.
I installed hyprland shortly after. This gave me the ultimate experience in customization yet. I installed packages for GUI management, such as the quickshell-based Noctalia and DMS. I installed tools like `hyprpolkit` and `lact` to manage my hardware and wayland protocols. I installed minor tools that did not come with some desktop environment like `hyprshot` for screenshots. This was truly my system on the most granular level within reason. I finally had what I wanted with the declarative tools in a safe environment with my community backing.

This is where the issue I mentioned earlier came in. My philosophy and ideals began to butt heads with the Arch Linux developers themselves.
Philosophically, the additions of birthdates at the init level and Arch Code of Conduct actions really began to rub me the wrong way. Adding more metadata collection to the system I built without my consent and the Arch Developers using their CoC to enforce compliance across their community genuinely made me uncomfortable. I can see why somebody would use these features in today's world, though I am not among that crowd. Something about it all made me want to find a system that would respect my visions and ideas. This is where the great Arch Linux fell from grace in my workflow, and led me to try the next steps at last.

## Artix Linux - A Proper Reintroduction
I learned the philosophy behind Artix Linux much later than I had actually tried it in the past. It gave me init freedom. I was allowed to choose more than just systemd as my PID-1. This was the further control I desired. This was a no-brainer leap, as I loved Arch Linux as it was with this simple friction point being what was pushing me to move. This was what I needed. From here, I modified `decman` to support openRC services, which was the init system of my choice. It was supported by the Gentoo project and felt mature. I also modified `decman` to use `paru` over `yay`, as `yay` needed systemd fakeroot environments to function. I changed my packages to openRC equivalents. It all felt like it was coming together.
One small issue: Arch Linux was not built for init freedom. It was made for systemd. This in mind was always in the back of my head, but I pressed on. Eventually, I somehow made my system kernel panic on accident. I wasn't scared as I had all my files backed up and my declarative config could have solved it, but I used this as an opportunity to think. Was there a distro out there that properly respected init freedom from the foundation? Something with repos that knew people would be using more than just systemd?

## Gentoo Linux - The Ultimate Granular Control
Gentoo felt like the make-it or break-it scenario. It was this going to be this or Artix. Once the kernel panic broke my install, I decided "why not use this to try Gentoo". I used this opportunity to consult documentation and install it right away. It was definitely a paradigm shift for me, learning USE flags and what it meant for my system. Enabling certain optimizations for my CPU that otherwise would be sidelined in typical binaries was something I gladly welcomed. I built my own kernel and media programs as well as hyprland setup and steam runtimes. Exposing myself to Portage, the Gentoo package manager, was an experience. I learned what compiling my own programs could benefit me with and what package managers could actually do for the user, more than what I was used to with pacman on Arch Linux. I even had a python program written to declare my packages, gsettings, snapper configurations, configuration files, grub bootloaders, and other things while importing Portage directly. This was `decage`, a declarative portage program that ran my system for the brief time I used it. At the end, though, I ran into USE flag hell -- requiring me to modify package after package after package to include USE flags for things I did not know I would have been installing later that needed those flags. This was a huge frustration for me for something I saw little real-world benefit in. This gave me the answer I needed: Artix was the end of my journey.

Then, I remembered something else that was screaming my name the whole time.

## NixOS - The Final Destination
Landing on Nix was inevitable. I had been declaratively using my systems since I used Arch Linux. I knew `decman`, I knew `dcli`, I dabbled in some brief `ansible`, and I even had `decage` written for Gentoo. Nix was the ultimate ending. I gave it a fair chance and read through documentation. I researched other people's experiences. I read what it meant to use Nix. To declare my system, services, users, packages, configurations, atomic rollbacks, generations, kernels, everything. It was all organized in one place I could push to github. It was perfect. I had to give this a chance before reversing my journey.

My friction point was the init system -- but I gave this a pass, as I knew I could declare my system to remove what I did not like about systemd.

My mind was set on this. I immediately got the install disk put together and gave it a shot. There was one major change in my workflow in this aspect, though. I installed it with a terminal screen, not GUI. I had previously used `archinstall` to get my system running on Arch Linux, but this time I wanted to know what happened under the hood, so I undertook that task. It was different from typical systems. I wrote my declarations in a `flake.nix` and `home-manager` configuration. After a few typo and syntax fixes, I built it and booted into my fresh new NixOS system.

### Stellyrland - The Workstation
It was perfect -- I could declare my system in one place and watch it build itself all over the computer. I could tell it to `programs.ssh.enable = true;` and it would do it. I no longer had to sift through layers of directories and configurations, it was all in one place. This was it.

I built optimizations. I used nix to manage my desktop and hyprland configurations, to declare my programs, my services and tune my GPU with `lact`. I even used nix to build a custom kernel and to configure boot parameters. It had it all. It is the perfect system, and there is more to it than simply declaring a workstation.

### Stellyrtop - The Mobile Office
I use a Macbook Pro for working and school. I was amazed to find that Nix had a module to manage it -- Nix-Darwin.
I needed to use this, as I was already familiar with Nix on my workstation. To have all of my programs and configurations be identical across computers was a huge step up in workflow management. I promptly got to work putting it in my `flake.nix` and making my configuration platform-agnostic. I did the work mentioned in multi-systems that allowed me to now have one configuration manage two computers from a git repository. I was in organizational and declarative heaven. I had the control I wanted from day one and the language to organize it. I had a system that was mine the way I declared it. I had the tools necessary to do the same across all corners of my workflow. It was exactly what I wanted.

This is where I land today. I manage both NixOS and Nix-Darwin from the same configuration. I use the dendritic structure mentioned in multi-systems. I have dreams of deploying computers and managing wide systems of infrastructure. There is this huge interest in declarative computing I hold, and now my systems run on it. Today, I continue to learn this philosophy and functional language. I wish to use it in the future for projects and careers.
